indexmenu_n_1

== Getting Started

This manual is somewhat outdated. It is essential to read the summaries
of updates to versions 4.8.8, 5.0.0 and 5.2.0 mentioned below, to
understand how OpenCPN works nowadays.
https://opencpn.org/OpenCPN/info/downloadopencpn.html[OpenCPN Website
Download Page]

=== OpenCPN 5.2.4

OpenCPN version 5.2.4 was released on October 18, 2020. It is a bug
fixing release with some graphical and user interface improvements.

=== OpenCPN 5.2.0

OpenCPN version 5.2.0 was released on July 15 , 2020. A summary of the
changes is available https://opencpn.org/OpenCPN/about/ver520.html

=== 

=== OpenCPN 5.0.0

OpenCPN version 5.0.0 was released on March 23, 2019. A summary of new
features as well as retired features is available
https://opencpn.org/OpenCPN/about/ver500.html or as an
link:../manual/opencpn_version_5.0.0-changelog.epub[Ebook .epub] . Using
this document together with the old 4.8.8 manual it's possible to gain
information on (almost) all features in 5.0.0. A rewrite of this manual
is required to fully document the new version.

Required reading YachtValhalla's PDF Tutorial for the new user starting
up link:../manual/exploring_opencpn_v5.0_.pdf[Exploring OpenCPN
(v5).pdf]

=== OpenCPN 4.8.8

Welcome! This is the Documentation for the OpenCPN 4.8.8 stable release.
There are still areas that are not fully updated, however an excellent
summary of https://opencpn.org/OpenCPN/about/ver482.html[Improvements
since v4.8.0] is available. It is very easy and intuitive to get started
with OpenCPN. The different menus, including the clever
context-sensitive right-click menu, make it likely that you will find
what you need. The program contains a lot of options to fit users with
special demands and hardware.

Required reading YachtValhalla's PDF Tutorial for the new user starting
up link:../manual/exploring_opencpn_v4_.pdf[Exploring OpenCPN (v4)]

=== HELP, FAQ & OpenCPN User Manual

The most frequently asked questions by new users, seen in the
http://www.cruisersforum.com/forums/f134[OpenCPN Forum], are, in most
cases, already answered in the *+++OpenCPN USER MANUAL+++*. If you are
going to use this program for actual navigation, you need to read
through this document to fully understand the scope of the program, as
well as all the details.

If you have difficulties finding a particular subject, please *use your
browser's built-in search ability*, often called just “*Find*”. This
works best using the stable release which is all on one web page.

In the Program “OpenCPN” Press
image:../manual/help.png[image,width=25,height=25] and then the *Help
Tab* to access the built-in version of this document. The installed
documentation will open in your default browser. *This is the first
place to go for help, read the documentation please*.

==== Android Opencpn Manual App

Download the OpenCPN User Manual App from Playstore, and run it
directly. It has an embedded eBook reader, so no need for lithium. The
Playstore app is here:

* https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=org.opencpn.opencpnusermanual&hl=en

==== User Manual Download

HTML files and directories. Uncompress into a new folder and use your
browser to access the help files:

* http://opencpn.navnux.org/data/doc482.7z[OpenCPN-4.8.2.7z (doc482.7z)
20mb]

Epub Book Reader can be used Calibre Reader or Firefox Epub Extension:

* http://opencpn.navnux.org/doc/OpenCPN%20User%20Manual-4-8-6-Sept-18-18-compress-lossy-2-70pc.epub[OpenCPN-4-8-6-Sept-18-18-compress-lossy-2-70pc.epub
mb (16mb)]

PDF OpenCPN User Manual Download:

* http://opencpn.navnux.org/doc/OpenCPN%20User%20Manual-4-8-6-Sept-18-18-medium-compressed.pdf[OpenCPN-4-8-6-Sept-18-18-medium-compressed.pdf
(25mb)]

The other way to download/mirror the html help files is to use
https://www.httrack.com/[HTTrack Website Copier]. Download it and make
mirror a copy of the current manual to your computer. Don't forget too
add filters so that file links are not downloaded! See
https://www.httrack.com/html/faq.html#Q1b1[FAQ] For example, add file
filters for -*.zip, -*.7z and any other linked files you do not want
downloaded.

==== To help you get started:

* Links in _italic_ are internal to this document. Placing your cursor
over a link will cause the link to be underlined.
* External links may be *Bold*, +++Underlined+++, or in the “http:/\…”
format and need an Internet connection.
* *Marks* and *Waypoints* may have somewhat different definitions;
however, in this document they generally mean the same thing.

image:../manual/help-about.jpeg[help-about.jpg,title="help-about.jpg",width=356,height=311]

=== Copy Settings File & Log File to Clipboard

If you encounter difficulties in using OpenCPN you may be asked to
submit your *Settings File* and/or your *Log File*. This data will help
the developers to diagnose your problem.

To locate these files, in the program “OpenCPN” Press
image:../manual/help.png[image,width=25,height=25] and then the *About
Tab* and two tabs will show as shown below:

[.np_break]# #

[cols=",,",]
|===
|Copy Settings File to Clipboard |Copy Log File to Clipboard |Donate
|===

[.np_break]# #

Use these tabs for an easy way to copy these files, and then paste the
clipboard contents to a document and attach it to a Cruiser's Forum
post.

As you can see above, image:../manual/help.png[image,width=24,height=24]
also documents the people contributing to OpenCPN and a copy of the
license OpenCPN uses, GNU GENERAL PUBLIC LICENSE Version 2. We are
always looking for volunteers.

=== Agreement Before Using OpenCPN

Here is the note that all users have to approve when installing the
program.

[source,code]
----
OpenCPN is distributed in the hope that it will be useful, 
but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of 
MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. 
See the GNU General Public License for more details. 
OpenCPN must only be used in conjunction with approved paper
 charts and traditional methods of navigation. 
DO NOT rely upon OpenCPN for safety of life or property.
----

This is not a text on general navigation. We assume that you are
familiar with nautical navigation. Reading this text and using OpenCPN
will not in itself make you a “navigator”.

=== IMPORTANT NEXT STEPS

*Getting started using OpenCPN consists of 4 basic steps:*

* link:getting_started/opencpn_installation.html[OpenCPN Installation]
Will lead you through installing OpenCPN on your particular OS and
computer.
* link:getting_started/chart_installation.html[Chart Installation] of
Charts to be read by OpenCPN (OpenCPN does not include charts)
* link:charts.html[Charts] Basic Features - Main Source for using charts
* link:getting_started/gps_setup.html[GPS Setup] to communicate with
your computer and OpenCPN (Optional, but very useful) Completing these 4
steps will get you started and allow you to check out the program.

There is also a very useful PDF Tutorial for the new user starting up
called
http://www.mediafire.com/file/8a0wr8e53ddrh95/Exploring+OpenCPN+%28v4%29.pdf[Exploring
OpenCPN (v4)]

If you still have questions or would just like to get in touch with
other OpenCPN users, there is a large community behind OpenCPN. You can
find us in this http://www.cruisersforum.com/forums/f134/[Cruisers
Forum.]

If you are an advanced users with programming experience we recommend
the link:../developer_manual.html[Developers Manual].
